William's years, what were the major
accomplishments,
the major changes?
Of all the changes that I saw, what were the major
changes?
Well, of course, on Rudder, in Rudder's time, I'd
have to rank the coeducation military,
non-military, as the primary changes there. One
other minor change which goes unnoticed I think
sometimes is the amount of money we spent on making
the whole campus wheelchair accessible. Not much
was said about that, but I watched that. It was
interesting. Especially watching the academic
buildings where They went to great pains to build a
ramp that had exactly the same architecture that
the building involved. I thought that was the
highest sensibility
on the map. That's the rudder years. I see that as
being really...
What about the Williams years? Williams years...
Now somebody else had to start, just below him,
start pulling the academic strings and making
academia more visible, more respectable, and
everything like that. Who do you think did that? I
have to give him credit, but I'm not sure. It may
have even started down the rudder. but I know
Rudder is the one who appointed Bob Logan. He said,
you get all the stuff on the whole campus that has to
do with scholarship in one place, and you do it now.
Not a bunch of deans do it, you do it. That started
there in his, probably his last couple of years or
so. Then I'd have to say Williams probably
continued that way again. Because that has been a,
been a watermark for the university. I take people
in and show them those plaques in the student
center, and the number of endowed scholarship,
they just gobble
it up.
I think the Rutter Tower, which is built after
Rutter, of course, and that complex there is a
major event. That ball, that may have started
going before, but it was finished in his
administration and began to be used, and I think
that furnished sort of a focal point for a lot of
stuff. But I don't really know any specific
incidents about Williams' time as much as I know
about Rudder's time. It's more spectacular, I
guess, than his, but there just seemed to be a
general atmosphere a pervasive academic
atmosphere which was in those last years there.
Did you have any feel about any changes in student
quality? Oh yeah, we saw that. Once again, that
started in Rudder's years, but was enhanced down
the line there.
in the counseling center, counseling and testing
center back in the old days. And we had charge of
doing all the testing on the campus. When I came in
61, they were not using the SAT or the ACT tests.
They were using the old American College of
Education, Council of Education test, which was
completely outdated and everything. But they're
using it because of their system of pre-week
enrollment. freshman week there, when they
brought everybody in and gave them the test all in
one pile and got the test results out and the
advising done all in one week's time. Come out of
that freshman, even with corporate and stuff like
that. And they couldn't get, as I understand it,
they couldn't get Educational Testing Service to
go along with that. So,
for the fall of 62, We got them to do, we did what they
call a validation study of the SAT and had 2,000
students that year come in. We took the SAT and ran
the norms, compared to the national norm and all
stuff like that. Then the next year the board voted
to require the SAT. Our enrollment dropped to
1,300. Everybody scared of the test, and
everybody wanted to come where it wasn't
required. And
we got our base norm that year. And from that year
on, it went up steadily from then on.
And the academic, it's hard to put your finger on
what caused the improvement. Maybe it took five or
six years for that to really sink in. kind of thing.
That we were really a class act from now on. Funny
thing, they did the same thing with the graduate
school. I don't know whether I ever told you this or
not. We administered the GRE to two years of
graduating seniors. Paid for it ourselves. They
paid for it. It was called Institutional
Administration. And it was before we started
requiring the GRE. And we ran those norms, and it
was so interesting because the university level
of achievement, the verbal score was highest in
the Department of History. The math score was
highest in the whole college of engineering at the
figures.
But the highest department in the whole place on
the Achievement Test, not the Aptitude Test, but
the Achievement Test was the Department of
Economics. Did you know that? I knew. 95th
percentile rank on national norms. How good. Al
Chalk had done his work well. The lowest
department was mathematics. Fifth percentile
rank on national norms. And how important
mathematics is to a science and engineering
institution. Well, they'd been teaching. He's
doing mathematics for years. Well, see Rudder and
the boy Rudder, I have to give him credit for this,
because he found the money to give a lot of money to
math and brought in some high-powered math
people. I don't remember their names right now,
some of them weren't so hot, but they were used to
academia and they got a big pay for a year or two to
put their course on a video tape. really
successful. And, but guess who he gave a lot of
money to also? The best department, Al Chong. Got a
lot of money for him. And that's when it started
going up. But it takes a few years for that to seep on
down and take effect only down in the Williams
years, I think. All right, now then in 1970 Dr.
Williams replaces Rutter. Then in 1976 Dr.
Williams has a heart attack, almost fatal, not
quite, replaced by Dr. Miller. Who was the dean in
education following Hubert?
Following Hubert was Corrigan.
He didn't get here till 80 because I was the
chairman of the committee that selected him.
Well, Limbacher was interim dean after Hubert.
Okay. And they selected another dean at that time.
My mind's blank right now. All right, does Hubert,
Hubert becomes chancellor in the late 70s? Yeah.
Okay, so maybe, maybe. You said you became
chancellor the same year that Miller was
president. Yeah, all right, and you remain active
until you retire what year? 86. 86. Okay, let's
talk about Dean Carrigan then. Describe him as
dean. Thorough scholar, and he was good for the
college.
He didn't, he brought a national reputation with
him.
And he immediately attracted the attention of the
governor, who put him on the governor's special
committee. And he's got some tales to tell about
that. You may want to talk to him about that. But he
was the only educator on that whole committee of 25
people. And Ross Perot was up in all these
coattails all the time. But he had some
interesting tales to tell there. Really, I
believe he was. I can't recall the dean before Dean
Cardin. He stayed nine years, didn't he? Did he
relate well to the education and statewide?
Statewide, as far as I know, he related well with
them. All right, at the time you retired then,
where would you have placed Texas A&M's education
program in the state, qualitatively? That's a
toughie.
I was minimally involved in teacher training, but
I had an interest in it all the time. I taught one
course over there, adolescent psychology, all
the time. I didn't have a chance to really talk with
other people at other institutions. I have to go a
little bit on reputation there, but I think we were
better than Texas Tech and North Texas and San
Marcos and others.
Commerce and Huntsville come up pretty high on my
books. University of Houston, not so well. I
didn't think their teacher prep down there was all
that good. But that's what I hear from it. All
right, what about UT? Where were we compared to
Austin?
Equal to or better. Oh, OK. So we, in your opinion,
we were clearly one of the best, if not the best.
Okay. Texas Tech had a strange system out there. I
never understood exactly what it was. They
refused to have departments. They called them
areas of emphasis out there. And I didn't hear much
out of that, good or bad. But I always wondered how
they got by with departing from the usual
structure that we have and working within the
system. Let's look back. Can you think of any, in
hindsight, any mistakes that were made of action
or inaction?
Here. Yes. Here. Action or inaction. There were
things we did that turned out not to be
well-advised are things that we failed to do that
we could have done. I didn't think the consortium
finally faded from the scene, just like
performance-based education. The consortium
between the local school superintendent, the
Texas University, and the education service
centers. I thought that wasn't entirely our
doing. But I thought that idea was not so hot.
And areas of omission. Are there some things we've
just simply failed to... Well, partly from
personal experience And this little project I did
on going out and evaluating what they thought,
well, not enough classroom management, how to
handle tough kids. I had an Aggie come back to
school from East Houston after having taught here
in East Houston in seventh grade. And she was a
battle fatigue case. They put her into a seventh
grade classroom, little slums down there. didn't
give her any support, and so I think the lack of
preparation for the real world of teaching is
where I think they've fallen short, may still be
falling short. They teach them to go out, yes, into
a nice small size, middle size, western rural
area. Don't have a lot of racial, social upheaval
going on. They do all right out there, but If we're
supposed to be preparing for East Dallas, South
Dallas, and East Houston, I think we're failing
there.
People that you now, as you look back on, that you
would want to pat them on the back if you could? John
Barker. Why? Because he said, I'm willing to serve
anywhere that anybody asks me. I'll do it until I
drop it. He never, and because at certain crucial
moments in faculty meetings, this man spoke up and
said the things that some of us didn't have the guts
to stand up and say. And he was in your department?
Yeah, educational psychology.
Okay. Yeah. And he'd been there since the year
before I came. He took a full-time teaching job.
Which, by the way, I had also interviewed for that
job and decided I would not take it. I wasn't ready
yet. And Frank Hubert interviewed me. Who else in
addition to Berker that you would
pat on the back, commend?
I think, unsung,
Chris Borland.
He went on to be dean at UT San Antonio. He doesn't
get much credit for doing what he did here.
I'm not, I don't have to mention Williams and
Rutter anymore. I'm talking about other people
who gave their whole life to this place and really
need a pat on the back for it. I think Chris Gromlin
did, before he died. Walter Varble.
He was in psychology? He was in psychology, but he
taught the education for me, just like everybody
else. I have to tell you a little bit about him. This
illustrates some past history that I wasn't here
to observe, but I know about it because Varble told
me all that, and the way things came about. He was
brought here in 1939 to head the psychology
department.
Brand new PhD out of Kansas. But before they got
into reorganization, things were going a little
bit slow then in war camp. So he ended up teaching
algebra and trigonometry throughout the war to
ASTP people. And then the president, after the
war, was not in favor of psychology. So we didn't
have a psychology department. Well, finally,
they got preparatory to becoming a college of
education, a college of liberal arts. They
decided to form a department of psychology, apart
from department of educational psychology, or
department of education, it was then. Split the
two. So they did a national search for a department
head. Barman, in 1965, as long as that, a few 25
years after he was chairman of the search
committee. They brought three people to the
campus and they all turned it down. Then the
university, the board, whoever. Well, Dr.
Barber, how about you be the department head? He
told them to go to hell.
And to their everlasting shame, misfortune they
got Clesson Martin.
I'd
have to go off camera before I talk very much about
Clesson Martin. He didn't do the university any
good, really. That's a long story. Let's see, any
staff people that you would want to pat on the back,
special folks?
Yeah,
I'd say Austin Curley.
Leading question, why? Well, same reason he
served,
because somebody said do it. He was the man on the
spot and they said do it. But he was putting in
another possible situation when they They'd take
a master's degree guy and give him a position which
had been held by a dean and decimate the college.
And he stayed and kept it together for 15 years
after that. And did some of the good things we just
talked about, the testing program and stuff like
that. And
he served on the committee for, did I know them? of
the Rutter Tower and all that stuff. He was on the
study committee that did that. Yeah, I'd say
Austin, they made him Emeritus, Emeritus
Director of Counseling and Testing Center. I
don't know whether that includes being Emeritus
in the department or not, but at least they kept the
hat to him for that.
Let me think about that for a minute.
I should have asked quite ago, do you remember any
change in manner or style of classes with women now
in the class and or minority students? Do you
remember any incidents? Yes. Peggy was going to
school when, and you may want to interview her some
other time on that, she was in class with, before
women were admitted.
And there was some minor harassment involved
there in the language lab and stuff like that.
Nothing you really put your finger on, but it was
obvious that they still were a good Aggie boy to do
that kind of thing.
Yeah. Do you remember any racial incidents of any
sort? No racial incidents.
There's some subtle attitudes, which I saw from
time to time on faculty and students' parts. You
weren't, by chance, teaching a summer session
that first summer that black students were
enrolled?
No. No, it wasn't. Because I knew nothing about
that going to happen right then until the
announcement at the end of the first day of classes
that that day black students had attended class.
And I never heard of a single incident at all. I
heard it
was only positive. Art,
do you agree with me this way? In those years before
coeducation and integration, I felt that there
was not any divisiveness in the student body over
national background or anything that you were
either an Aggie or you weren't an Aggie, that your
nickname might indicate your ancestry. But that
was just part of the fact that faculty members had a
nickname too. Austin Curley told me that as a
student here in 35, he had two Mexican-American
school roommates. Didn't make a big difference to
him. That's the impression I have. In fact, he
still keeps up with some of those people. Were
there still nicknames for faculty in education
when you got here? What were some of them? I didn't
know. I didn't know what they were. I knew about
screaming out. But I didn't hear any nicknames
over our way. There weren't any over there? There
must not have been, or I wouldn't have heard of
them. let's see now a while ago we were you didn't
have think of any decisions of omission omission
during these years omission which they should
have done and I should have done and now in
hindsight I
get the impression this I don't know from personal
observation but The regular military faculty, I
think, I get the impression that they did not do all
they needed to do to help either integration or
core education. Anyway, over there, or core
education. That's my impression of it. They all,
service academies all did it before us. and been
announced as national policy from way back. And
being a part of a major institution, I thought even
though they were most of them Aggies and they
wanted to uphold their Aggie traditions, it seems
to me that they could have done more than they did
over there. All right, we're getting close to the
end now. Any anecdotes you want to share? I'll
think of them after you leave. I reserve the right
to tell you after this. What are some of your
favorite Aggie stories? I guess one of them, while
I was still at Baylor, we had a basketball game on
campus before the students came back to campus up
there. And Aggies do seem to do the fucking place,
even in the holidays, to see the baseball game.
This must have been mid-50s, somewhere back in
there. And they had a riot over at the gymnasium. I
mean, of course, I was the dorm director living on
the campus, and me and the other director peeled
out of there and went over to the gymnasium and
started trying to close the park. And I hear
somebody slugging somebody else, and one said,
hey, don't hit me, I'm an Aggie too. He couldn't
tell who was who. He said, I'm an Aggie too, don't
hit me. That's the honest truth. That happened out
there in front of the gymnasium on the campus of
Baylor.
We had the Baylor students guarding the campus up
there from the Aggies before they bailed. And they
had that game every year. And they built fires on
the corners.
One carload of Aggies had been roughed up quite a
bit. We brought them into the apartment there and
gave them coffee and settled them down and sent
them on their way. That was my first contact with
one of the greater Aggies while I was still a
player. That's absurd. Of course, all the time,
you remember in those years, an Aggie with a
uniform didn't have to have wheels. He could
hitchhike anywhere in the state of Texas and no
problem. And I've not yet had a single, in all the
conversations I've had, I've not yet heard a
single horror story of Aggie hitchhiking. They
all say it went well, went well. Let's see, in
class, some Aggie fun stories from class.
I'll have to take a rain check. Aggie excuses. Oh,
Aggie excuses, yeah. I've heard some of the better
ones that overshadow all of mine from a daughter,
Chris. She shares all of her excuses with me these
days. So I'm completely, but I reserve, I want to
come back and tell her. Tell her she ought to put
those on tape. You know, just pick out the machine
and put it. Some letters. Yes. Oh, yes. Yeah. All
right, you can butt in one time. You'd been
teaching Monday, Wednesday practice. Yeah. And
suddenly you got assigned one Tuesday, Thursday.
Yeah. And you went on
Wednesday
and forgot to go on Thursday. And then didn't have a
meeting, but something happened that you weren't
there on Friday. When you went back on Monday, you
said, well, how long did you wait till I come? And he
was going to go into the joke about with an
instructor, you wait 10 minutes, and with an
assistant professor, 15, associate, 30, and a
full professor, one hour. He said, how long did you
wait? And a voice came up from the back saying, I've
been here since then. Oh, that's good. That's
good. All right. Then the last, what parts of the
institution are dearest in your heart?
Oh, that's a tough one. I guess...
I'd like to say it to the conductor, but I guess I
can't say that. I say that because I like the
citizen-soldier idea so much. That's the reason I
almost give them the vote. But I guess the feeling
of camaraderie that I have seen in graduate
students in my department is the most heartening
thing I have seen. It is different from other
institutions. In other words, a cohort group
comes in, 10, 12 people in one year, and they stay
together for life, just like the Aggies do. They,
in professional life afterwards, they're there.
And I think I have to give some credit to that, the
continuity of the faculty. We had the same five
faculty members. Who were they? Roach, Riley,
Pope, Barman, and Smith.
Y'all came about the same time. All came about the
same time, late 60s or early 70s. And stayed? Well,
I'm nobody there now. No, but all stayed pretty
well until retirement. All stayed for 20 years,
yeah. And in that time is when we had this
camaraderie with the graduate students. They
would pass on their apartment to the next people to
come in, just like the vet school does. And they had
a few bucks for somebody who needed help, money
wise. And they covered, sometimes not widely, for
their fellow students from time to time. Any
extracurricular parts of the institution that
are deep in your heart? I like the athletics. I like
the, I think spectator sports, mass spectator
sports serves a useful purpose, especially as
practiced here. You see, no other institution
that I know of has the control of the student body as
these students do. The yell leaders here and the
core here has control of the crowd and everything
else. It's a riot at other places. Look at the
international scene in hockey and stuff like
that. And by no means do we approach that in other
schools here, but I think A&M is superb. And if
there's ever evidence of sort of undergrowth and
undergirding of a custom, worthwhile custom,
it's that that's been perpetuated.